---
layout: post
title: Less code is often better
author: Nate
date:  June 18, 2023
---

Early in my software engineering career, a senior engineer at Microsoft told me "the best solution is one that requires no new code."
At the time, I thought this was nonsense. Is not my role as a software engineer to write code? Why would writing *less* or *no* code be better?
More code means more bug fixes, more features, more services, and more tools. So why is more not always better?

Fast forward to 2023 -- now I am the most senior engineer on a team, and I give the same guidance. Prefer solutions that require less or no code.

What led to this shift in perspective? It boils down to this: writing code is a one-time cost, 
but maintenance is an ongoing cost. Maintenance of successful code will extend for years beyond your original projections because migrating
to a new thing will have its own cost. So, your code will run until the benefit of removing it outweighs the cost of refactor or migration.

On the one hand, this can be exciting. Your legacy could be a system the lasts for years, even decades.
But on the other hand, you may live to regret introducing it in the first place, especially if your code ends up having problems.
And more often than not, code will have problems after it is first written. Many problems appear immediately, but others creep in slowly as
the system around it changes.

Another thing shifted, too -- I see now that software is a means to an end, but not the end itself. I was especially blind to this because 
my first job was building an open-source framework at Microsoft. The code *was* the product, or so I thought. Now I realize our product was
an intermediate ingredient. The framework on its own produces no value. It gained value by helping other developers solve problems will less code
of their own to maintain.

## Hidden costs

Ongoing maintenance costs can be hard to understand when you are learning to build software. Often your initial tasks are to write
something new. Also, often young developers move quickly between projects and teams, so they are not left to see the consequences
of their work play out.

However, with time, most engineers end up maintaining they or someone else created a long time ago. And when that happens, what was 
hidden now because a headache. We have a term for this: "technical debt". It is often a *dirty* word used to malign a system or 
piece of code because its issues are more expensive than they should be, or the issues are getting in your way to accomplishing something.

## Open-source and sticky ownership

It should come as no surprise that if you make code available for free, you are giving something away. GitHub and others have tried to 
setup "sponsorship" programs to help fund open-source developers. I have been lucky to receive some sponsorship, but despite their generosity,
I have still only earned 10 to 15 cents per hour of effort spent. I could probably have earned as much by walking the streets to look for lost coins. 

In professional environments, maintenance is passed from person to person as employees rotate through a project. In personal, open-source projects,
there is almost never someone to pass along a project to. So, ownership of your code will stick to you for the lifespan of your code.

So, I add double emphasis to "write less code" if you are considering open-sourcing your code. While open-source has brought great benefits 
to the world of software as a whole, most of the benefits have been collected by the big companies and projects, and not the individuals working in it.
For an individual getting started, something besides money has to motivate your open-source work.
Consider your motivations, and whether those will change over time.

### An example

Five years ago, I uploaded a project called [DotNetCorePlugins](https://github.com/natemcmaster/DotNetCorePlugins) and 
advertised in Twitter with a blog post ["Introducing an API for loading .dll files"]({% post_url 2018-07-25-netcore-plugins %}).
My motivations at the time were related to my work in the [@dotnet](https://github.com/dotnet) project at Microsoft.
I saw many developers struggling with dynamic loading. I had found one solution that was not straightforward to discover, but
once I found I could abstract some complexity of .NET in a library, it seemed like a good chance to promote my findings
(and my reputation) but posting online.

Since that time, however, several things occurred which I did not anticipate.

1. There bugs. The project has 160 issues. I made 4 releases after the initial code was published to address them, but the bugs continued to roll in.
2. .NET added a standard library feature which filled the need, but people kept using my project.
3. I lost interest in C# and .NET. Plus, life changed. I aged, I started a family, I developed non-computer hobbies.

Now, years later, I am deprecating the project and alerting developers this has hit the end of its life.

## Write code responsibly

In case my points above have led you to think you should not write code, let me add some closing thoughts.

If you are about to write some code, you should also ask yourself:

* who is this code for?
* who will maintain it?
* is there existing code I can repurpose or use instead?

Writing code is fun, so keep doing it. Just be careful not to get carried away and neglect to consider its future.
